# Instructions for Construction of Soil MFC Prototypes

## _June 2022_

### Jack Baskin Engineering, The University of California, Santa Cruz

This document is an instruction manual on how to re-create the soil microbial
fuel cells (MFCs) constructed by Colleen Josephson's laboratory at The
University of California, Santa Cruz. Please note, this document is an
instruction on the physical construction of the fuel cells only. Code and
circuit documentation can be found elsewhere in the git repository. This
document will provide instructions on how to construct one bin containing two
MFCs. 

###### Required Materials

- Large Plastic Bin (43.2 cm L x 28.3 cm W x 16.5 cm H) 
- Soil
- Dechlorinated water
- Burlap
- Carbon Felt
- Titanium Wire
- Binder Clips
- TEROS-12 Soil Moisture Sensor

### 1. Create the Soil Slurry

If needed sift debris such as large rocks or plant material from the soil.
Sifting is only required if there is material that would obstruct conductivity
between the carbon felt pads. For construction of a single unit there should be
approximately `9.5-11 L` of sifted soil. Add water and stir the soil till the
soil reaches the consistency of mud.

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175663092-a8f446ce-bf56-44af-9b82-7db259d6c06f.jpg" width=50% height=50%>

*Figure 1: Soil Slurry*

### 2. Lay Burlap

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175664796-5409e6bc-bf0c-4a6e-9b81-c59564d2a3ce.jpg" width=50% height=50%>

*Figure 2: Plastic Bin*

Insert the burlap into the plastic bin. The burlap should reach the bottom of
the bin and all corners. Clip the burlap to the edges of the plastic bin. See
`Figure 3` for an example. It is recommended to use at least three layers of
burlap to prevent tearing.

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175664950-819b132c-3286-40d7-af8e-5054f5524b2d.jpg" width =50% height=50%>

*Figure 3: Burlap Clipped into the Plastic Bin*

### 3. Construct the Carbon Felt Pads

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175681895-cfeecf75-c2da-44fd-ade7-17c6c59ecb7f.jpg" width =50% height=50%>

*Figure 4: Carbon Felt Circle*

Cut out four `12.5cm` diameter carbon felt pads. Insert the titanium wire
through the diameter of the pads. Bend the wire around the end of the pad to
secure it in place. It is alright to have the wire to stick out as long as there
is good conductivity. It is recommended to cut the wire after it has been
inserted. The exact length can vary depending on the application.

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175686392-40c3696f-d726-46a0-b9fe-33b1ba4f8713.jpg" width = 50% height =50%>

*Figure 5: Wire Inserted into Carbon Felt Circle, Right View*

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175693783-6615dcee-1ce5-4e1e-a373-a12b50c41ad3.jpg" width = 50% height = 50%>

*Figure 6: Wire Inserted into Carbon Felt Circle, Top View*

Repeat this process for all four carbon felt circles.

### 4. Insert Anodes

Pour approximately `3-5 cm` of mud into the burlap. Make sure the mud is
distributed evenly, and that there are no air bubbles. Lay two of the carbon
felt circles flat on the mud at opposite ends of the bin. Each carbon felt
circle will serve as an anode of one microbial fuel cell.

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175695520-a97be077-8451-4236-9b6d-ea71bd1e8dfb.jpg" width = 50% height =50%>

*Figure 7: Anodes on top of soil slurry*

### 5. Insert TEROS-12 Sensor

Pour an additional `2 cm` of of mud on top of the anodes. Be sure to pour the
mud evenly and avoid air bubbles.

Insert the TEROS-12 Soil Moisture Sensor slightly adjacent to where the carbon
felt circles would be. Lay the sensor horizontal with the three tips pointing
towards the MFCs. Ensure that the cord of the sensor does not lead out above the
anodes.

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/176010757-07c28d1e-dd82-4e91-ae0c-a56beb737be8.jpg" width = 50% height =50%>

*Figure 8: Soil Moisture Sensor Insertion*

### 6. Insert Cathodes

Pour another `3 cm` layer of mud on top of the carbon felt layer. For a total
mud layer between the anodes and the cathodes of `5 cm`. Once again make sure
the mud pours flat and that there are no air bubbles. Lay the second set of
carbon felt circles directly over top of the anode carbon felt circles. This
second set of carbon felt circles serve as the cathodes, and if the cathodes are
too far offset from the anodes the MFC will not produce any voltage.

<img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/66144060/175695699-24998a1c-f94d-4c43-8ab6-4a2f043bea2f.jpg" width = 50% height =50%>

*Figure 9: Cathodes on top of sol slurry*

### 7. Monitor

Monitor and maintain desired soil moisture over time. The MFCs need to be
connected to a constant load for the microbes to form on the anode and cathode.
The current and voltage measurements should be negligible for around a week,
then the current and voltage will slowly rise until it reaches steady state.